Hello, freak bitches. I found out about you several years back.
I, uh, I had heard something about toxelplasmosis. Am I saying that right? Yep.
Yeah. And I had seen, uh, uh, a speech that you had given on it,
where you were talking about how many people had been infected by this cat
parasite. I, I of cats my whole life,
and I even had feral cats and I've always wondered,
like I should probably get tested. And I'm worried about the result, right?
Brad, it's not <laugh>. Well,
it was just fascinating to me that literally, I mean,
what is the number that you estimate in an Americans alone that might have been.
Infected it's on the order of, I'm not sure with Americans,
but worldwide it's something like 50% of humans is the best guess
50%.
Of humans worldwide, something on.
That scale with, for people.
Who've never heard of this,
would you mind explaining what this parasite is and how it affects rats and then
cats and then people.
Okay. Totally bizarre. So it's this, this protisone parasite, uh,
tox plasma Gandhi, and it's got one of these weird parasitic lifestyles.
The only place on earth where it could reproduce sexually is in the gut of a
cat. I don't know why there are people who know this,
but so it reproduces, there comes out in the cat, feces,
feces are eaten by rodents, and now toxos evolution.
A challenge is to get that rodant into a cat stomach.
So what tox has evolved is this ability,
it slowly migrates to the brain of rodents and
basically wipes out the innate fear that rodnts have of cat
smells like you take a lab rat,
who's be in like the descendant of lab Ratts for like a thousand years.
And they've never seen a cat and put like a little puddle of cat pee in its
cage. And the Ratt's gonna go on the other side of the cage,
just hardwired instinctual,
aversion to cat pheroones and then put tox in a rat.
And it looses that aversion. And in fact, in a subset of rats,
they like the smell. So out in the natural setting,
you now go and approach a cat and soon the rodents inside the cat' stomach and
tox was completed in its life cycle.
Well, I had heard that it was, uh, so it's a subset of rats that,
that actually are gravitated towards it.
Cause I'd heard it actually rewires 'em sexually, right? Yes.
That that's actually work that we did in my lab,
that it basically crosses some of the circuitry in the brain and the
hypothethalamus.
So that cat pheroones that used to be activating every alarm circuit
in your like limbic system and these rodents now instead sort of
taps into sexual arousal path ways. And in male rats,
when they smell cat pheroones they increase testosterone production.
Um, so toxo has just figured out the most brilliant way of doing it.
It makes cat piece smell sexy.
Do, is there any understanding.
At all of the mechanism of how a parasite can figure out
how to rewire an animal's sexual reward system,
the fear of predators? Like how does that work? Well,
that's something my lab spent a bunch of years on, um,
trying to figure out mean, you look at some of these parasites, this,
this taps into this whole world of behavioral manipulation of hosts by
parasites and turns out they've like evolved unbelievably
brilliant mechanisms for manipulating hosts for their own benefit. I mean,
think about it. You get rabies, you get a rabbit dog.
And what that's about is a virus that has affected the nervous system of that
dog.
So that it's now rabbit and more likely to bite somebody with viral
particles in its saliva, which it now passes on to the next individual.
Like you take 10,000 neuroscientists and stick 'em in a convention on the
neurobiology,
chief aggression and rabies knows more about the neuro wiringing of aggression
than we do. Wow.
And toxo knows quotation marks,
uh, something about fear and aversion and the neurobiology of attraction.
Part of what it seems to involve is toxo.
Somewhere along the away has picked up a gene that is pertinent to the
dopamine system in mamals dopamine.
Is this neurotransmitter it's about pleasure. Um,
there's no protizo and parasite for billion years,
that's had any use for this stuff,
except it's part of how toxo seems to be manipulating the reward system in
rodents. And then a couple years ago,
there's a paper showing that in chimpanzees,
toxo makes you less afraid of the smell of leopards. Wow.
So this appears to be a parasite that just has evolved like this
spectacular insight into fear circuitry and attract circuitry.
And it's all for its own benefit to wind up in a catscu. So.
It's specifically cats,
like do the chimpanzee still have aversions to snakes and other things that can
kill them? Yep.
Yeah. Wow.
And at one point my lab was full of like Bobcat key and Wolf P
and it's actually like a company you could buy a urine and for a, um,
I don't know why anyone would want it except for us. Um,
but they sell urine from actually what they use it for is you can go spritzs it
around your garden to scare the deer away. They're coming in eating stuff.
So there's, I don't know where they get the urine from, but it's like,
come certifiify all of that. Um, and yeah,
it's remarkably.
Specific. So like other,
have they ever done tests where they test like Wolf urine or anything like that
around chimps? Do they have any aversion to that? Um.
As far as I know, the Chimp study has only been with big cat urine. Okay.
But the rodent studies exactly that showing it's a fair specificity,
the rodnts lose a little bit of their general skittishness.
Uh, they get a little bit disinhibited behaviorally. So just in general,
they're out more and more exploratory, more likely to get eaten.
But the most selective lasering effect is they're not scared anymore
of cat phones.
Now what's fascinating to me is that I've also read that, um,
there was a disproportionate amount of successful soccer teams
that are in countries with high rates of infestation of toxplasma.
Okay. That, that one's, that one's new to me. But that,
that sounds like exactly the sort of epidemiological studies that are popping up
about humans. Okay. So what about humans? Um,
there's two branches of interesting stuff with tox and humans.
One is a literature that's been around for quite some time showing that tox
seemed to increase the risk of schizophrenia. Um,
there's a higher rate with schizophrenia of individuals who have
antibodies against tox. In other words, sometime in the past,
their body was dealing with it. Um,
who had cats growing up whose mother had cats during pregnant
and like anybody who gets pregnant knows you immediately get all anxious about
cat litter boxes because of the possibility of toxictopplasmosis.
It can attack the fetal nervous system and do all sorts of damage.
And a subtle version of it seems to be a sleeper effective,
increasing the risk of schizophrenia. Um,
the other realm is toxinfected humans get subtle
changes in personality, neuropsychology sort,
neuropsychological profiles. They get a little bit disinhibited. Mm.
If you are tox infected,
you are more likely to die in a car accident involving reckless speed.
If you are toinfected and clinically depressed for the same severity of
depression, you're more likely to impulsively kill yourself. In other words,
to's doing something kind of similar. If you are a rat,
one of the hardest wired,
scary things in the universe out there is the smell of a cat. If you are human,
it's hurling through space,
really fast jumping out of windows and toxo seems
to blunt a lot of those effects there in this.
Um, the, the speech that I saw you give you were talking about your time, um,
working in a hospital and that there was a disproportionate amount of motorcycle
victims.
This was actually something I heard from a, a clinician, uh, a, uh,
an old, uh, sort of parapsychology infectious disease doctor,
who sort of,
when I was first telling him about this sort of the merchant toxic story,
he had like one of these bolts of memory saying, my God.
I remember back when I was a resident, there was this old doctor saying,
you know, if you're ever harvesting organs from an accident victim,
I don't know why. I don't know why,
but if it's from somebody who was in a motorcycle accident,
make sure you check to see if they have toxics a plasmosis. I don't know why,
but there's a high rate of that,
that you find in organs from people who were killed driving
motorcycles,
recklessly totally anecdotal and equals one kind of thing.
But nonetheless, this,
this was a guy who like studies infectious disease and toxplasmosis,
and had not heard about sort of the behavioral findings before. And that, uh,
how are the recesses of his memory? So what initially seemed like, okay,
this is a parasite that's very selectively developed this life cycle between
cat stomachs and rodent brains and completing its life cycle
and weird wanting to gets into humans that have some behavioral effects. Also,
that's just kind of evolutionary spillover,
but then you see if it's doing something similar between chimps and leopards,
uh,
suggesting that that life cycle manipulation has been selected for in
primates as well. Very strange. It's very strange.
And for me,
the strangest thing is the certainty with which there's a gazillion
viruses and bacteria,
and God knows what else out there that manipulate host behavior in ways
we just haven't figured out yet. Or we just haven't. Right.
We haven't discovered the particular. Yeah. Uh,
what is it due to women of a similar effect seems to
have less severe effects on neuropsychological profiles of women.
Um, again, the literature on this is pretty scanty in humans,
but it seems to have some similar effects, but not as extreme. However,
this story now gets a little bit more complicated and this is actually this
fabulous scientist, Aja vis, uh, who's my postdoc.
Who's now a professor in Singapore. Who's continued to study this. Okay.
So normally one of the things animals have evolved to be really
good at is picking up signals that somebody else is unhealthy.
Like a potential mate is unhealthy there's sickness behavior.
There's very oldfactory cues. If you're roddent makes perfect sense.
The last thing you want to do is to be mating with somebody who's like ransod
and infectious, um, and rodent equivalents of STDs.
So normally sick animals, parasite infected animals and such, uh,
are detected by other rodents and avoided
tox does something different.
You get a toxinfected male and now he smells more
attractive to female rodents.
And when mating tox gets into the sperm and be,
can be transmitted to the female. Whoa, so suddenly we've got a different story.
Here.
We start off with a parasite story where tox is just ruthlessly exploiting
the poorer rodents for its own like reproductive benefit and its own
evolutionary selfish gene will be benknown instead it's got
elements of,
instead of parasiteism symbbiosis so you're a male
rat infected with toxo downside.
You're more likely to get eaten by a cat upside.
You're more likely to pass on copies of your genes by increased sexual
selection. So, so it might be in fact, more of a balanced,
uh, symbiotic relationship between male rats and to, so,
you know, more research is needed, blah, blah.
It's just like cool sort of biology out there. It's crazy.
And is it, is it transferred sexually with men and women too? As well as with.
I don't know. I don't think it's been looked at oh.
Wow. That seems like something I would want to look at right away. <laugh> yes.
What about, um, organ donors?
Um, other than again,
pure anecdotalism that one elderly doc somewhere back when
saying watch it when you're getting organs from like people kill and motorcycle
accidents beyond that. I don't know. I mean, people are looking at it I'm sure.
But.
Do they even test like say if you got a liver and you know,
like you needed a liver transplant, would they test, I suspect.
They do.
And sort of in the clinical world of people who worry about to talk
pregnancy,
scary alarm going off to anything else after an acute period of infection,
you have a latent, toxic plasma infection. In other words,
the agreed upon sort of notion there is to has gone latent.
It's formed sort of these cysts that are in, um,
and you got nothing to worry about then, but the whole notion that meanwhile,
up in the nervous system there's effects happening there. You know,
infectious disease,
people are thinking about inflammation outside in the body, there for them,
chronic toxic infection is not something you worry about a whole lot,
but if it's, um, having behavioral effects up there in the nervous system,
it is something to worry about. Well, it's.
Just, it it's, to me, it's unfathomable how this little thing figures out,
how to hijack a, a whole, a whole body,
a whole biological system and work it to its own desires.
Just, it's very, it's very hard for me to grasp where.
Know if you think of it in terms of, oh, I don't know.
Talk has had like a hundred thousand more
generations to evolve its ways of exploiting mammals than mamals have
had ways of fighting it off. Um,
what's most remarkable is it turns out this is like a whole world of parasites
that do bizarre manipulative of things to their hosts.
Most of it's not in the realm of,
of mammals instead there's like some parasitic,
something or other that gets into barnacles and takes over their productive
system so that the barnacle digs a hole for them,
them not the barnacle,
but the parasite to lay eggs into there's, you know,
the aquatic worm.
That infects the grasshopper makes it commit suicide. Exactly.
That one's bizarre that one's bizarre.
There's this wasp that gets into Cocker roaches into nervous.
It <laugh> see you, you.
Know, about I'm fascinated by parasites beyond, but it's just,
it's so confusing to me how something, I mean,
obviously you're dealing with hundreds of thousands of generations for it to get
to this, this current state,
but like how something evolves to be so effective. Yeah. It's just,
it's so confusing.
It's remarkable.